## What is an algorithm?

- A procedure to accomplish a specific task.
- The idea behind any reasonable computer program
- The transaction that takes any of the possible input instances and transforms it to the desired output.

```c
// Implementation of a sorting algorithm in C language

void insertion_sort(item_type s[], int n) {
	int i, j;

	for (i = 1; i < n; i++) {
		j = i;
		while ((j > 0) && (s[j] < s[j - 1])) {
			swap(&s[j], &s[j - 1]);
			j = j - 1;
		};
	};
};

```

- There are three desirable properties for a good algorithm. We seek algorithms that are _correct_ and _efficient_, while being _easy to implement_.

- Correct algorithms usually come with a _proof of correctness_, which is an explanation of why we know that the algorithm must take every instance of the problem to the desired output.

- One must note the difference between algorithmic and _heuristic_ approach, in which, heuristic being the attempt to solve a problem experimentally and specially by trial-and-error methods.

- Reasonable-looking algorithms can be easily incorrect. Algorithm correctness is a property that must be carefully demonstrated.

- A technique for good algorithm design is to narrow the set of allowable instances until there is a correct and efficient algorithm.

## Reasoning about correctness

One of the tools to distinguish correct algorithms from incorrect ones is by a method called _proof_. A proper mathematical proof consists of several parts:

1. There is a clear, precise statement of what you are trying to prove.
2. There is a set of assumptions of things that are taken to be true, and hence can be used as part of the proof.
3. There is a chain of reasoning that takes you from these assumptions to the statement you are trying to prove.


Before we start thinking about algorithms, we need a careful description of the problem that needs to be solved. Problem specification has two parts:

1. The set of allowed input instances.
2. The required properties of the algorithm's output.

There are two common traps when specifying the output requirements of a problem.

1. Asking an ill-defined question. (Example: Asking for what the best route between two places on a map is a silly question, unless you define what best means (shortest route in total distance, fastest route, etcetera)).
2. Creating compound goals. Pick a single criterion.

## Demonstrating Incorrectness

The best way to prove that an algorithm is incorrect is to produce an instance on which it yields an incorrect answer. Such instances are called _counterexamples_. Good counterexamples have two properties:

- _Verifiability_: You must be able to calculate what answer your algorithm will give in this instance, and display a better answer so as to prove that the algorithm didn't find it.
- _Simplicity_: A good counterexample make clear why the proposed algorithm fails.
